Astro for ETL guide (#306)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/astro-etl.md

        snowflake_conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID,
        s3_keys=[S3_FILE_PATH + '/trasnformed_file_name.csv'],
        table=SNOWFLAKE_RESULTS_TABLE,
        schema=SNOWFLAKE_SCHEMA,
        stage=SNOWFLAKE_STAGE,
        file_format="(type = 'CSV',field_delimiter = ',')",
    )

    extracted_data = extract_data()
    transformed_data = transform_data(extracted_data)
    load_subscription_data >> extracted_data >> transformed_data >> load_transformed_data

classic_billing_dag = classic_billing_dag()
```

![Classic Graph](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/astro-etl/classic_billing_graph_view.png)

While we achieved our ETL goal with the DAG above, there are a couple of limitations that make the implementation more complicated:

- Since there is no way to pass results from `SnowflakeOperator` query to the next task, we have to write our query in a `_DecoratedPythonOperator` function using the `SnowflakeHook`, and do the conversion from SQL to a dataframe explicitly ourselves.
- Some of our transformations are better suited to SQL, and others are better suited to Python, but transitioning between the two requires extra boilerplate code to explicitly make those conversions.

> - While the TaskFlow API makes it easier to pass data between tasks here, it is storing the resulting dataframes in as XComs by default. This means we need to worry about the size of our data. We could implement a custom XCom backend, but that would be extra lift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- While the TaskFlow API makes it easier to pass data between tasks here, it is storing the resulting dataframes as XComs by default. This means that we need to worry about the size of our data. We could implement a custom XCom backend, but that would be extra lift.
```

> - Loading data back to Snowflake after the transformation is complete requires storing an intermediate CSV in S3, and writing the code to do so ourselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Loading data back to Snowflake after the transformation is complete requires writing extra code to store an intermediate CSV in S3.
```

### The DAG With Astro

Next, we’ll show how to rewrite the DAG using `astro` to alleviate the challenges listed above. 

```python
from airflow.decorators import dag
from astro import sql as aql
from astro.sql.table import Table
from astro import dataframe as df

from datetime import datetime
import pandas as pd

SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID = "snowflake"
S3_FILE_PATH = '</path/to/file/'

# Start by selecting data from two source tables in Snowflake
@aql.transform()
def extract_data(subscriptions: Table, customer_data: Table):
    return """SELECT * FROM {subscriptions}
    LEFT JOIN {customer_data}
    ON customer_id=customer_id"""

# Switch to Pandas for pivoting transformation
@df
def transform_data(df: pd.DataFrame):
    transformed_df = df.pivot_table(index='DATE', 
                                    values='CUSTOMER_NAME', 
                                    columns=['TYPE'], 
                                    aggfunc='count').reset_index()

    return transformed_df

@dag(start_date=datetime(2021, 12, 1), schedule_interval='@daily', catchup=False)

def astro_billing_dag():

>     # Load subscripton data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Load subscription data
```

    load_subscription_data = aql.load_file(
        path=S3_FILE_PATH + '/subscription_data.csv',
        file_conn_id="my_s3_conn",
        output_table=Table(table_name="subscription_data", conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID),
    )
    # Define task dependencies
    extracted_data = extract_data(subscriptions=load_subscription_data,
                                    customer_data=Table('customer_data', conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID, schema='SANDBOX_KENTEND'))

    transformed_data = transform_data(extracted_data, output_table=Table('aggregated_bills'     conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID))
    
    # Append transformed data to billing table
    load_transformed_data = aql.append(
        conn_id="snowflake",
        append_table="aggregated_bills",
        columns=["DATE", "CUSTOMER_ID", "AMOUNT"],
        main_table="SANDBOX_KENTEND.billing_reporting",
    )

    transformed_data >> load_transformed_data

astro_billing_dag = astro_billing_dag()
```

![Astro Graph](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/astro-etl/astro_billing_graph_view.png)

The key differences in this implementation are:

> - The `astro` functions `load_file` and `append` take care of loading our raw data from S3 and transformed data to our reporting table respectively. We didn't have to write any explicit code to get the data into Snowflake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `load_file` and `append` functions take care of loading our raw data from S3 and transforming data to our reporting table respectively. We didn't have to write any extra code to get the data into Snowflake.
```

> - Using the `transform` function, we can easily execute SQL to combine our data from multiple tables. The results are automatically stored in a table in Snowflake. We didn't have to use the `SnowflakeHook` or write any of the code to execute the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using the `transform` function, we easily executed SQL to combine our data from multiple tables. The results are automatically stored in a table in Snowflake. We didn't have to use the `SnowflakeHook` or write any of the code to execute the query.
```

> - We seamlessly transition to a transformation in Python with the `df` function, without needing to explicitly convert the results of our previous task to a Pandas dataframe. We then write the output of our transformation to our "aggregated_bills" table in Snowflake using the `output_table` parameter, so we don't have to worry about storing the data in XCom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We seamlessly transitioned to a transformation in Python with the `df` function without needing to explicitly convert the results of our previous task to a Pandas dataframe. We then wrote the output of our transformation to our "aggregated_bills" table in Snowflake using the `output_table` parameter, so we didn't have to worry about storing the data in XCom.
```

- `dataframe`: Similar to `transform` for SQL, the `dataframe` function allows you to implement a transformation on your data using Python. You can easily store the results of the `dataframe` function in your database by specifying an `output_table`, which is useful if you want to switch back to SQL in the next step or load your final results to your database.

In the next section, we’ll show a practical example implementing these functions.

## Example ETL Implementation

To show `astro` for ETL in action, we’ll start with a pretty common use case: managing billing data. In this first scenario, we need to extract customer subscription data by joining data from a CSV on S3 with the results of a query to our Snowflake database. Then, we need to perform some transformations on the data before loading it into a results table. First we'll show how to implement this without `astro`, and then we'll show how `astro` can make it easier.

### The DAG Before Astro

Here is our billing subscription ETL DAG implemented with OSS Airflow operators and decorators, as well as the TaskFlow API:

```python
from datetime import datetime
import pandas as pd

> from airflow import DAG

Author: Good call

from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from airflow.providers.snowflake.hooks.snowflake import SnowflakeHook
from airflow.providers.snowflake.transfers.s3_to_snowflake import S3ToSnowflakeOperator
from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.hooks.s3 import S3Hook

S3_BUCKET = 'bucket_name'
S3_FILE_PATH = '</path/to/file/'
SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID = 'snowflake'
SNOWFLAKE_SCHEMA = 'schema_name'
SNOWFLAKE_STAGE = 'stage_name'
SNOWFLAKE_WAREHOUSE = 'warehouse_name'
SNOWFLAKE_DATABASE = 'database_name'
SNOWFLAKE_ROLE = 'role_name'
SNOWFLAKE_SAMPLE_TABLE = 'sample_table'
SNOWFLAKE_RESULTS_TABLE = 'result_table'

> @task(task_id='extract_data')

Author: I did want to show that you can pass in a different `task_id`, since it's a question that comes up a lot :)

    # Save results to S3 so they can be loaded back to Snowflake
    s3_hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id="s3_conn")
    s3_hook.load_string(transformed_str, 'transformed_file_name.csv', bucket_name=S3_BUCKET, replace=True)

@dag(start_date=datetime(2021, 12, 1), schedule_interval='@daily', catchup=False)

def classic_billing_dag():

    load_subscription_data = S3ToSnowflakeOperator(
        task_id='load_subscription_data',
        snowflake_conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID,
        s3_keys=[S3_FILE_PATH + '/subscription_data.csv'],
        table=SNOWFLAKE_SAMPLE_TABLE,
        schema=SNOWFLAKE_SCHEMA,
        stage=SNOWFLAKE_STAGE,
        file_format="(type = 'CSV',field_delimiter = ',')",
    )

    load_transformed_data = S3ToSnowflakeOperator(
        task_id='load_transformed_data',
        snowflake_conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID,
        s3_keys=[S3_FILE_PATH + '/trasnformed_file_name.csv'],
        table=SNOWFLAKE_RESULTS_TABLE,
        schema=SNOWFLAKE_SCHEMA,
        stage=SNOWFLAKE_STAGE,
        file_format="(type = 'CSV',field_delimiter = ',')",
    )

    extracted_data = extract_data()
    transformed_data = transform_data(extracted_data)

>     load_subscription_data >> extracted_data >> transformed_data >> load_transformed_data

Author: Ugh I tried that, but that doesn't maintain the `load_subscription_data >> extracted_data` dependency. I feel like there should be a cleaner way, but I'm not sure what it is.

- Some of our transformations are better suited to SQL, and others are better suited to Python, but transitioning between the two requires extra boilerplate code to explicitly make those conversions.
- While the TaskFlow API makes it easier to pass data between tasks here, it is storing the resulting dataframes as XComs by default. This means that we need to worry about the size of our data. We could implement a custom XCom backend, but that would be extra lift.
- Loading data back to Snowflake after the transformation is complete requires writing extra code to store an intermediate CSV in S3.

### The DAG With Astro

Next, we’ll show how to rewrite the DAG using `astro` to alleviate the challenges listed above. 

```python
from airflow.decorators import dag
from astro.sql import transform, append, load_file
from astro.sql.table import Table
from astro import dataframe

from datetime import datetime
import pandas as pd

SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID = "snowflake"
S3_FILE_PATH = '</path/to/file/'

# Start by selecting data from two source tables in Snowflake
@transform
def extract_data(subscriptions: Table, customer_data: Table):

>     return """SELECT * FROM {subscriptions}
>     LEFT JOIN {customer_data}
>     ON customer_id=customer_id"""

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    return """
    SELECT *
    FROM {subscriptions}
    LEFT JOIN {customer_data}
           ON customer_id=customer_id
    """
```
WDYT about this for readability or something similar? I think the newlines help a little.

    transformed_df = df.pivot_table(index='DATE', 
                                    values='CUSTOMER_NAME', 
                                    columns=['TYPE'], 
                                    aggfunc='count').reset_index()

    return transformed_df

main_table = Table("billing_reporting", schema="SANDBOX_KENTEND", )

@dag(start_date=datetime(2021, 12, 1), schedule_interval='@daily', catchup=False)

def astro_billing_dag():
    # Load subscripton data
    subscription_data = load_file(
        path=S3_FILE_PATH + '/subscription_data.csv',
        file_conn_id="my_s3_conn",
        output_table=Table(table_name="subscription_data", conn_id=SNOWFLAKE_CONN_ID),
    )
    # Define task dependencies
    extracted_data = extract_data(
        subscriptions=subscription_data,
        customer_data=Table('customer_data', schema='SANDBOX_KENTEND')
    )

    transformed_data = transform_data(
        extracted_data,
        output_table=Table('aggregated_bills')
    )
    
    # Append transformed data to billing table
    append(
        conn_id="snowflake",
        append_table=transformed_data,
        columns=["DATE", "CUSTOMER_ID", "AMOUNT"],

>         main_table=main_table,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        main_table=Table("billing_reporting", schema="SANDBOX_KENTEND"),
```
IMO this is more readable than declaring a `main_table` variable above since it's only used once.
